Modeling Nitrate Export From a Mesoscale Catchment Using StorAge Selection Functions

Abstract

StorAge Selection (SAS) functions describe how catchments selectively remove water of different ages in storage via discharge, thus controlling the transit time distribution (TTD) and solute composition of discharge. SAS-based models have been emerging as promising tools for quantifying catchment-scale solute export, providing a coherent framework for describing both velocity-driven and celerity-driven transport. Due to their application in headwaters only, the spatial heterogeneity of catchment physiographic characteristics, land use management practices, and large-scale validation have not been adequately addressed with SAS-based models. Here, we integrated SAS functions into the grid-based mHM-Nitrate model (mesoscale Hydrological Model) at both grid scale (distributed model) and catchment scale (lumped model). The proposed model provides a spatially distributed representation of nitrogen dynamics within the soil zone and a unified approach for representing both velocity-driven and celerity-driven subsurface transport below the soil zone. The model was tested in a heterogeneous mesoscale catchment. Simulated results show a strong spatial heterogeneity in nitrogen dynamics within the soil zone, highlighting the necessity of a spatially explicit approach for describing near-surface nitrogen processing. The lumped model could well capture instream nitrate concentration dynamics and the concentration–discharge relationship at the catchment outlet. In addition, the model could provide insights into the relations between subsurface storage, mixing scheme, solute export, and the TTDs of discharge. The distributed model shows results that are comparable to the lumped model. Overall, the results reveal the potential for large-scale applications of SAS-based transport models, contributing to the understanding of water quality-related issues in agricultural landscapes.

Introduction

Human activities, especially agricultural practices, have altered the Earth's landscape. About 40% of the Earth's land surface has been converted to agricultural land (Foley, 2017). With a predicted increase in the global population until the middle of the 21st century, agricultural activities will be further intensified to meet the global food demand (The Royal Society, 2009; Godfray et al., 2010). This may have negative impacts on the ecosystem and human health. Nutrient pollution from agricultural sources has been identified as one of the major threats to aquatic ecosystems and via drinking water to human health in many areas worldwide (Alvarez-Cobelas et al., 2008; Vitousek et al., 2009). In recent years, there has been a call for a “sustainable intensification” (increasing agricultural productivity from the same agricultural land area while reducing its environmental impacts) of agricultural practices (The Royal Society, 2009; Godfray et al., 2010). To achieve such an objective, understanding the transport and fate of solutes from their entry into a catchment to the catchment outlet is necessary.

The age of a water parcel, that is, the time passed since its entry into a catchment, provides valuable information for understanding flow and transport processes at the catchment scale (Benettin, Bailey, et al., 2015; Botter et al., 2011; Sprenger et al., 2019). This is because the age of a water parcel encapsulates information about its flow path characteristics, the time it has been in contact with catchment material, and the hydrological processes it has been subjected to (Asadollahi et al., 2020; McDonnell et al., 2010; Rodriguez et al., 2018). In recent years, the formulation of transport based on the age of water (transit time distributions, TTDs) has been emerging as a useful tool for understanding how catchments store, mix, and release water and solutes (Benettin et al., 2017; Botter et al., 2011; Hrachowitz et al., 2016; Rinaldo et al., 2015; Sprenger et al., 2019; Vander Velde et al., 2010). In many catchments, the response time of streamflow to rainfall inputs could be several orders of magnitude faster than the response time of instream solute concentration to solute inputs (Hrachowitz et al., 2016). For these catchments, transport models explicitly based on the transit time are required to capture velocity-driven transport phenomena.

TTDs could be incorporated into conceptual catchment-scale transport models using different approaches. For example, the functional form of TTDs could be predefined and assumed to be time-invariant (Ilampooranan et al., 2019; Rinaldo et al., 2006; Van Meter et al., 2017, 2018). However, experimental data and numerical studies have indicated that TTDs (e.g., for discharge) are time-variant for many hydrological systems (Botter et al., 2010, 2011; Heibüchel et al., 2020; Kaandorp et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2016; Rodriguez et al., 2018; Van der Velde et al., 2012; J. Yang, Heidbüchel, et al., 2018). To capture the time-invariance and ease the problem of parameterization of TTDs, Van der Velde et al. (2010) used TTDs obtained from forward physically based groundwater models with particle tracking. In large catchments, however, a rigorous mathematical framework for the representation and parameterization of time-variant TTDs is needed. This is because the application of physically based groundwater models in large catchments is not always possible due to a lack of data and/or computational capacity.

Recent studies have shifted the focus from TTDs to StorAge Selection (SAS) functions (Harman, 2015, 2019; Rinaldo et al., 2015; Van der Velde et al., 2012). SAS functions describe how water parcels of different ages in storage are mixed to produce outflows, thus, affecting the dynamic of TTDs. SAS functions can be considered as a generalization of TTDs (Harman, 2019). SAS functions are more stable in time and easier for parameterization than TTDs (Van der Velde et al., 2012). SAS functions could be combined with storage–discharge functions to provide a coherent framework for describing both celerity-driven water flow dynamics and velocity-driven solute transport mechanisms (Harman, 2019; Hrachowitz et al., 2016). For this purpose, there have been several SAS-based models developed for modeling solute (or isotope) transport from plot to catchment scales (e.g., Benettin et al., 2013, 2017; Benettin, Kirchner, et al., 2015; Bertuzzo et al., 2013; Harman, 2015; Lutz et al., 2017; Queloz et al., 2015; Wilusz et al., 2017). An in-depth discussion of SAS-based models was provided by Hrachowitz et al. (2016). In general, these studies have proven the effectiveness of the chosen models in capturing catchment-scale flow and transport phenomena for small catchments (with an area less than 10 km2). However, application and validation of SAS-based models have not been done at larger spatial scales (e.g., drainage areas of about 100 km2).

At larger scales, the catchment's landscape, meteorological conditions, and land use management practices are often heterogeneous. As a result, the catchment responses, especially the nutrient processes within the root zone, could be highly heterogeneous (e.g., X. Yang et al., 2019). While the SAS concept implicitly represents the heterogeneity in flow pathways, the spatial heterogeneity of biogeochemical processes, catchment characteristics, and meteorological conditions have not yet been adequately addressed within the SAS concept. In other words, effects of spatial heterogeneity and a thorough testing of the concept for larger scales have not yet been addressed. The main focus of this research is to fill those gaps.

The mesoscale Hydrologic Model (mHM)-Nitrate model (X. Yang, Jomaa, et al., 2018) is a grid-based water quality (nitrate) model with the hydrological and water quality concepts taken from two widely used models, the mHM (Kumar et al., 2013; Samaniego et al., 2010) and the HYdrological Predictions for the Environment model (Lindström et al., 2010). The mHM-Nitrate model could provide valuable insights into the spatial variability of water and nitrate dynamics in the root zone (X. Yang et al., 2019; X. Yang, Jomaa, et al., 2018). The model is able to account for the spatial heterogeneity in land used management practices, soil type, and meteorological forcing explicitly.

In the mHM-Nitrate model, the groundwater storage consists of active and inactive storages with an assumption of complete mixing between these storages. From our point of view, this assumption does not properly represent velocity-driven transport. Under the complete mixing assumption, a part of the solute input to groundwater would be instantaneously transported to the stream. In other words, there is no time lag between input and output signals. In catchments with velocity-driven transport, however, the time lag between input and output signals could be up to decades (Ehrhardt et al., 2019; Meals et al., 2010). In addition, the subsurface could be far from a completely mixed storage compartment (e.g., J. Yang, Heidbüchel, et al., 2018). Even if the assumption of complete mixing between the active and inactive storages is valid, the applicability of this assumption with nonconservative solutes is still unknown, particularly with application in a single compartment system with high temporal resolution. Few studies (e.g., Hrachowitz et al., 2013, 2015) have successfully employed either the well-mixed or the partial mixing assumption between the active and the inactive storages to capture velocity-driven transport of conservative solutes (Hrachowitz et al., 2016). Despite nitrate being a reactive solute, leached nitrate out of the soil zone in the mHM-Nitrate model is treated as a nonreactive solute. However, nitrate leaching out of the soil zone will be subject to additional removal processes along its flow path to the stream, for example, via denitrification in the shallow and deep aquifers (e.g., Fukada et al., 2003; Hiscock et al., 1991; Knoll et al., 2020; Kolbe et al., 2019; Rivett et al., 2008; Smith et al., 2004). Nevertheless, the existing mHM-Nitrate model (X. Yang, Jomaa, et al., 2018) provided a promising tool for further development using the SAS concept.

The objectives of this study are to (1) replace the description of the nitrate submodel for the subsurface (below the soil zone) in the mHM-Nitrate model with a time-variant SAS-based model, and by that (2) present a first test of a SAS-based transport model at a mesoscale catchment. The proposed model, hereinafter referred to as the mHM-SAS model, provides a unified approach for modeling both celerity-driven and velocity-driven transport at the catchment scale based on SAS functions. The model accounts for nitrate losses along its flow path from the bottom of the soil zone to the catchment outlet. In this study, we provide not only a detailed implementation of the SAS-based concept at catchment scale (lumped approach) but also an insight into the potential application of the SAS-based concept at a spatially more resolved grid scale (distributed approach).

